well he's one of the finest Minds in
medicine today Dr Siddharth Mukherjee
oncologist and professor of medicine at
Columbia University New York has a new
book that's just been released today
it's the song of the cell which looks at
the very basis of our existence through
the stories of real life patients Dr
Mukherjee takes us through an amazing
journey of how human cells were
discovered and how these are being used
today to revolutionize Medical
Treatments for diseases like cancer his
earlier book The Emperor of malady's won
a Pulitzer Prize and helped millions of
cancer patients and their families
around the world Dr Siddharth Mukherjee
joins us on NDTV now thank you so much
for joining us Dr Mukherjee you've done
a great service actually writing books
which explain are complex medical issues
to all of us particularly cancer and
this book the song of the cell goes back
to where it all begins how all of us are
made up of cells how these were
discovered and how they are being used
now in new treatments to treat diseases
how did the idea of writing about this
come to you
well you know after I finished my last
book the gene
um I began to think about how genes are
made
um are are enlivened Amino gene or a
molecule of DNA is lifeless without the
cell
um it is just a molecule it's a chemical
and my question really became what
happens at the next level of complexity
what is the next level of human
complexity of the complexity of the body
and so I really began to gravitate
towards cells and cells as a potential
locy of therapy as I thought about how
we might imagine
um the next sort of stage of Our Lives
as
um you know next level level of medicine
as it were and that's how I came about
cells and cell therapy
well you've written about what were once
considered radical new technologies and
the ethical debates that they sparked at
that time for instance the first in
vitro fertilization the first stem cell
transplants Etc in other words medicine
and science keep evolving and what we
think is radical today becomes normal
tomorrow
yeah I mean the great example is IVF I
mean you know in vitro fertilization
hundreds of thousands of babies have
been born with in vitro fertilization
but but it was first uh conceived people
thought that
um it was just uh unethical that uh you
know lots of people thought that
infertility is not a disease
um and so therefore uh you know one
white white treat something that's not a
disease now the book makes a very
radical distinction between disease and
desire
um and uh that distinction is of course
very important because people thought oh
gosh you know we've been living with uh
without with infertility and some people
don't think that it's a problem they
still don't think it's a problem but for
some other people it's an aching form of
suffering so
um you have this question of you know
infertility and IVF and um when IVF was
first conceived uh a lot of people
um argued that it wasn't it wasn't
disease and therefore should not be
treated
you're also passionately involved in a
project here in India to make T cell
therapy for Leukemia and Lymphoma
accessible for everyone now there's a
clinical trial which is underway on this
tell us more about why this therapy is
so important
well it's a very radical therapy in
which uh
uh patients with relapsed
refractive leukemia these are leukemias
that are no longer responsive to
standard therapy are treated with their
own T cells those T cells are
genetically modified in the laboratory
and uh grown in the laboratory for 14
days and then returned back to the
patients
um it's very radical it's very in the
United States it's extremely expensive
it costs uh anywhere 500 to 600 thousand
dollars
um we wanted to make that therapy
available in India I collaborated with
Kiran Shaw and Kush farmer created the
entire Factory yes this this is not any
kind of factory this is not like a nuts
and bolts Factory this is a place that
has to be extremely sterile and also the
diseases that we're treating are very
very dangerous these patients are almost
at the edge of death
um and the therapy itself is toxic
um so you have to start off with the
understanding that you know the therapy
itself can be potentially toxic and kill
you but if we if it's successful we can
cure about 70 80 percent of these
patients who would otherwise be
completely left without any options and
die from the leukemia that they
originally had so
um we have started these trials uh we
are in Midway and I have to say that I
can't tell you the results yet because
of course we're still in the middle of
these trials but we are trying to
provide the therapy for for children for
kids and there's nothing uh me like
watching someone who's 10 years old with
a little leukemia really come alive
after the therapy and as I said I mean
these are not simple things to do these
are very toxic therapies and there will
be of course certain a certain number of
toxicity is associated with these
techniques per se
you've also written in this book about
kovid and and very simply uh you know
you said that uh we have learned so much
and yet we have so much left to learn so
what did kovit teach you
well we've learned a lot we've learned a
lot about the immune system it was very
unanticipated we've learned about a lot
about how covet causes like severe
disease
um it's a very it's it was an incredible
medical mystery it Still Remains
somewhat of a medical history but we've
learned how covet causes this very
severe uh disease and it's by paralyzing
some parts of the immune system while
activating some other parts of the
immune system
um the virologist Akiko iosaki who's a
famous virologist calls it immunological
misfiring it's like an army that's uh
firing in the wrong direction
um and so we've learned a lot about Kobe
in in that sense but there are many many
medical Mysteries that are still to be
solved about how it evades the immune
system why you can have so many repeat
instructions and so forth so those are
Mysteries that we're still trying to
solve but you know uh the creation of
new of new vaccines against Google and
the possibility that we can actually uh
immunize ourselves against uh this
deadly virus
um has been a great learning experience
for all of us
what kind of treatments then are we
looking at in the near future as far as
cancer is concerned you've talked about
T Cell Therapy but are you more
optimistic today about the kind of
treatments that are available to people
um absolutely we're more optimistic we
have learned we're learning how to
harness the human immune system against
cancer which is a very big uh step
um this was not possible 10 years ago
immunotherapy is now part of the
standard uh a protocol against cancer
my own laboratory is trying to use diets
against cancer to use not just diets in
prevention manner but in a therapeutic
manner against cancer so we are trying
very hard to understand how cancers
depend on certain nutrients
um and uh and and harness those we are
learning how to
prevent some kinds of cancers using ones
that are caused by viruses using new
novel vaccines and of course carti or
T-cell therapy now all of these are as I
said they have costs that are associated
with them because uh in cancer
unfortunately nothing comes for free and
so um we're also learning how to harness
the toxicities against uh with these
therapies uh for cancer but there's a
whole gamut of new therapies uh that
we're all that everyone is involved in
the whole community of cancer
researchers is involved in and uh all of
them are novel
why do you think finally Dr Mukherjee
that it's important
to write the way that you do simplifying
this you know mystical world of science
and medicine for all of us some of your
peers have criticized you they say you
oversimplify things but others believe
you're doing an important service
thank you
well you know I think it's important to
simplify because it's impossible to read
a 500 page book in which you talk about
you know ctla4 or ba 4.2 and and so
forth I think uh that that would become
um that would become unreadable
um no one would read it no one would
understand it I think it's important
because it gives patience and the public
a kind of autonomy that is not otherwise
available I mean imagine you were
reading about
um economics and you had no clue about
supply and demand and you had no clue
about the more complex aspects of
Economics so
um you know I I try to reach what I
think is the is a kind of balance
between uh simplification uh avoiding
and you know I um in this book
especially I've moved there is a there's
a huge index and a huge
um epilogue and chapter after chapter
afterwards in which you can go into
great depth
um and I provide primary references
where if you really are interested in
deepening your knowledge about all of
this you can go in and deepen your
knowledge but I think I think the public
patients especially who are afflicted by
these diseases need to know what is
going on and how to
um to understand it so that they can
then therefore be able to uh to
understand what they're being treated
with and how
well the song of the cell is out today
congratulations on that Dr Siddharth
Mukherjee thank you very much for
joining us on NDTV thank you
thank you
[Music]